Sparse model IR
===============

The lattice model IR is the deployment artifact contract for sparse models. It
records sparse semantics, graph values, tensor parameters, and operation
attributes that must survive training/runtime boundaries. It is intentionally
smaller than a general compiler IR and intentionally stricter than Python
module pickling.

The current artifact path is MLX-side: ``mlx-lattice`` loads a validated
manifest plus ``safetensors`` weights, reconstructs an in-memory graph, and
executes that graph through registered public ``mlx_lattice.ops`` calls. A
future training-side package should emit the same contract rather than forcing
the deployment runtime to understand arbitrary training-framework modules.

Artifact layout
---------------

The artifact directory is:

.. code-block:: text

   model.lattice/
     manifest.json
     weights.safetensors

``manifest.json`` is the semantic graph contract. ``weights.safetensors`` is
the tensor payload keyed by names referenced from manifest nodes. Quantized
weights remain packed: the artifact stores packed integer weight tensors,
scales, biases, and a small metadata vector used to reconstruct
``QuantizedWeight`` at runtime.

Manifest contract
-----------------

The manifest records:

* schema version;
* producer/runtime metadata;
* coordinate order, always ``(batch, x, y, z)``;
* feature layout, always ``(row, channel)``;
* weight layout, always ``mlx-lattice``;
* dtype policy, one of ``preserve``, ``fp32``, ``fp16``, or
  ``fp16_inference``;
* named graph inputs and outputs;
* ordered semantic nodes.

Example:

.. code-block:: json

   {
     "schema_version": "0.1",
     "runtime": {"name": "mlx-lattice", "version": ">=0.2,<0.3"},
     "inputs": [{"name": "input", "type": "sparse_tensor"}],
     "outputs": [{"name": "logits", "type": "dense_tensor"}],
     "nodes": [
       {
         "id": "stem",
         "op": "sparse.conv3d",
         "inputs": {"input": "input"},
         "outputs": {"output": "stem"},
         "parameters": {
           "weight": "stem.weight",
           "bias": "stem.bias"
         },
         "attributes": {
           "kernel_size": [3, 3, 3],
           "stride": [1, 1, 1],
           "padding": [1, 1, 1],
           "dilation": [1, 1, 1]
         }
       }
     ]
   }

The graph is semantic, not backend-specific. It does not mention Metal kernel
names, TensorOps route names, CUDA route names, or generated Python.

Runtime compatibility
---------------------

``runtime`` metadata is validated by the MLX loader, not only recorded for
human readers. Artifacts generated by ``mlx-lattice`` use:

.. code-block:: json

   {"name": "mlx-lattice", "version": ">=0.2,<0.3"}

The loader accepts missing runtime metadata for local hand-authored manifests,
but a populated ``runtime.name`` must be ``mlx-lattice``. A populated
``runtime.version`` may use comma-separated comparison clauses:

.. code-block:: text

   >=0.2,<0.3
   ==0.2.0
   !=0.2.1

Unsupported version specifiers are rejected before graph execution. This keeps
the artifact boundary explicit: producers declare the runtime family and
version window they targeted, and deployment fails early when the artifact is
not intended for the installed runtime.

DType policy
------------

``dtype_policy`` controls floating tensor dtype normalization at the artifact
boundary:

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 24 76

   * - Policy
     - Runtime behavior
   * - ``preserve``
     - Keep floating arrays and sparse feature matrices in their supplied dtype.
   * - ``fp32``
     - Cast floating graph inputs, dense parameter tensors, and intermediate
       floating graph values to ``float32``.
   * - ``fp16``
     - Cast floating graph inputs, dense parameter tensors, and intermediate
       floating graph values to ``float16``.
   * - ``fp16_inference``
     - Apply the ``fp16`` cast in the inference runtime. This name leaves room
       for future training runtimes to preserve training precision while using
       half precision during deployment.

Coordinate arrays, integer tensors, byte streams, and packed quantized payloads
are not recast. Packed quantized weights keep their integer weight tensor,
scales, biases, and metadata exactly as stored in ``weights.safetensors`` so
quantized execution remains a real packed-weight path.

Value model
-----------

The IR uses named graph values. Public inputs and outputs may be typed as:

* ``sparse_tensor``;
* ``dense_tensor``;
* ``relation``;
* ``coordinate_set``;
* ``alignment``;
* ``quantization``;
* ``point_voxel_map``;
* ``bytes``;
* ``any`` for advanced utility graphs.

Node ``inputs`` normally map an operation port to one graph value name. For
public operations that consume sequences, the port may map to a list of value
names:

.. code-block:: json

   {
     "id": "concat",
     "op": "ops.cat",
     "inputs": {"tensors": ["left", "right"]},
     "outputs": {"output": "merged"},
     "attributes": {"join": "outer"}
   }

Operation coverage
------------------

The runtime registry is generated from the approved public lattice surface
rather than from one bespoke handler per operation. This gives the manifest a
compact call representation:

* ``inputs`` map operation argument names to graph values;
* ``parameters`` map tensor argument names to entries in ``weights.safetensors``;
* ``attributes`` store JSON-compatible constants such as strides, modes, and
  numeric thresholds;
* sequence-valued inputs are represented as a list of graph value names;
* operation specs expose input, value-attribute, and output value types, so
  graph builders and future exporters can validate wiring and infer manifest
  output contracts without duplicating type strings at every call site.

Every public function in ``mlx_lattice.ops`` is addressable as
``ops.<function_name>``. The generic route is intentionally broad: it covers
sparse convolution, pooling, feature transforms, coordinate utilities,
point/voxel utilities, relation builders, sparse algebra, and entropy helpers.
The registry infers most graph inputs, JSON attributes, sequence inputs, and
output value types from function annotations. When an argument is ambiguous,
for example a tensor-valued weight that must be stored in
``weights.safetensors`` instead of passed as a graph input, the public function
itself carries a small ``lattice_op_hints`` annotation. This keeps the contract
near the operation definition and avoids a separate local enumeration table in
the artifact runtime.

Common NN inference routes also receive stable semantic aliases:

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 28 32 40

   * - IR op
     - Inputs/outputs
     - Runtime call
   * - ``sparse.conv3d``
     - sparse input to sparse output
     - :func:`mlx_lattice.ops.conv3d`
   * - ``sparse.subm_conv3d``
     - sparse input to sparse output
     - :func:`mlx_lattice.ops.subm_conv3d`
   * - ``sparse.conv_transpose3d``
     - sparse input to sparse output
     - :func:`mlx_lattice.ops.conv_transpose3d`
   * - ``sparse.add``
     - sparse/sparse to sparse output
     - :func:`mlx_lattice.ops.sparse_add`
   * - ``feature.linear``
     - sparse input to sparse output
     - :func:`mlx_lattice.ops.linear`
   * - ``feature.quantized_linear``
     - sparse input plus packed weight to sparse output
     - :func:`mlx_lattice.ops.linear`
   * - ``pool.global_avg``
     - sparse input to dense output
     - :func:`mlx_lattice.ops.global_avg_pool` or coordinate-batch reduction

The generic form remains available as ``ops.<function_name>``. For example,
``ops.conv3d`` directly calls :func:`mlx_lattice.ops.conv3d`,
``ops.voxelize`` directly calls :func:`mlx_lattice.ops.voxelize`, and
``ops.sparse_add`` directly calls :func:`mlx_lattice.ops.sparse_add`.

Operation support is registered with small annotations and binding descriptors
instead of hand-written dispatch tables. Specialized aliases are used only when
the deployment contract benefits from a stable semantic name or from packed
quantized-parameter decoding.

Module export
-------------

``export_lattice_module()`` structurally exports approved ``mlx_lattice.nn``
modules and sequential containers composed from those modules. For custom
modules, implement ``export_lattice(builder, input_name)`` and append nodes
with :class:`mlx_lattice.export.LatticeGraphBuilder`. This supports explicit
DAGs, skip connections, and mixed built-in/custom blocks without requiring
Python tracing.

Example:

.. code-block:: python

   import mlx.nn as nn
   from mlx_lattice import nn as lnn
   from mlx_lattice.export import LatticeGraphBuilder

   class Residual(nn.Module):
       def __init__(self):
           super().__init__()
           self.proj = lnn.Linear(32, 32)

       def export_lattice(
           self,
           builder: LatticeGraphBuilder,
           input_name: str,
       ) -> str:
           projected = builder.add_module("proj", self.proj, input_name)
           return builder.add_op(
               "skip",
               "ops.sparse_add",
               inputs={"lhs": input_name, "rhs": projected},
               attributes={"join": "outer"},
           )

Supported module families include:

* sparse convolution and transpose-convolution modules;
* quantized sparse convolution modules;
* sparse feature modules and quantized linear;
* local and global sparse pooling modules.

Packed quantized weights are stored as real packed tensors plus explicit
metadata in ``weights.safetensors``. The runtime reconstructs
``QuantizedWeight`` objects before calling the public operation, so the
artifact does not silently dequantize into fake-quantized floating weights.

Explicit graph export
---------------------

For non-module pipelines, use :class:`mlx_lattice.export.LatticeGraphBuilder`
directly and save the result with ``save_lattice_graph()``. This path supports
multiple graph inputs and multiple graph outputs, which is useful for
point/voxel preprocessing graphs, relation-inspection utilities, and sparse
algebra pipelines.

The preferred authoring API is ``builder.call(op, **arguments)``. It uses the
same operation registry as the runtime, so graph-value arguments, value
attributes, JSON constants, and parameters are classified from the public
operation contract rather than repeated manually at every call site. Parameters
can be passed as existing artifact key strings or as tensor objects; dense
``mx.array`` values and packed ``QuantizedWeight`` values are stored into the
artifact weight dictionary automatically. The lower-level ``add_op()`` remains
available for tools that already produce manifest-shaped port dictionaries.

.. code-block:: python

   from mlx_lattice.export import LatticeGraphBuilder, save_lattice_graph

   builder = LatticeGraphBuilder(
       inputs={
           "points": "dense_tensor",
           "feats": "dense_tensor",
           "batches": "dense_tensor",
       }
   )
   quantization = builder.call(
       "ops.sparse_quantize",
       points="points",
       batch_indices="batches",
       voxel_size=1.0,
   )
   voxels = builder.call(
       "ops.voxelize_with_quantization",
       quantization=quantization,
       feats="feats",
       reduction="mean",
   )
   sampled = builder.call(
       "ops.devoxelize",
       points="points",
       voxels=voxels,
       batch_indices="batches",
       interpolation="nearest",
   )
   save_lattice_graph(
       "preprocess.lattice",
       builder,
       outputs={
           voxels: builder.output(voxels, name="voxels"),
           sampled: builder.output(sampled, name="sampled"),
       },
   )

Dense and quantized parameters use the same call path:

.. code-block:: python

   projected = builder.call(
       "feature.linear",
       input="voxels",
       weight=linear_weight,
       bias=linear_bias,
   )
   quantized = builder.call(
       "feature.quantized_linear",
       input=projected,
       weight=packed_quantized_weight,
   )

The builder tracks value types from registered operation annotations and
per-output operation specs. It rejects obvious wiring errors, such as feeding a
``dense_tensor`` value to a sparse feature operation or passing a dense tensor
where a structured point/voxel map is required. Most graph outputs therefore do
not need repeated type strings. Use ``GraphOutput(value, "any", name)`` or
``builder.output(value, value_type="...")`` when exporting a custom value whose
type cannot be inferred from a public operation binding.

Structured values can be composed without exposing Python object internals to
artifact authors. For example, occupancy utilities return typed objects, and
``builder.field()`` projects approved tensor fields back into the graph:

.. code-block:: python

   occupancy = builder.call(
       "ops.occupancy_downsample",
       coords="coords",
   )
   downsampled_coords = builder.field(occupancy, "coords")
   occupancy_mask = builder.field(occupancy, "occupancy")
   expanded = builder.call(
       "ops.occupancy_expand",
       coords=downsampled_coords,
       occupancy=occupancy_mask,
   )

Execution model
---------------

``load_lattice_model()`` constructs an in-memory graph runner:

.. code-block:: python

   from mlx_lattice.export import load_lattice_model

   model = load_lattice_model("model.lattice")
   y = model(x)

The runner validates node ports, graph wiring value types, runtime output
ports, runtime output value types, and parameters against the registry. It then
binds graph inputs by name, loads referenced weights, decodes packed quantized
parameters when requested, and dispatches each node through public
``mlx_lattice.ops``. DType policy is applied to floating graph inputs, dense
weights, and intermediate outputs before downstream nodes observe them. It does
not execute generated Python.

Global pooling note
-------------------

Relation-changing sparse ops may produce tensors without ``batch_counts``
metadata. The graph runner can still evaluate ``pool.global_sum`` and
``pool.global_avg`` when at least one graph input has known batch metadata: it
reduces by the batch coordinate column using the inferred batch count. This
keeps exported graphs deployable without requiring every intermediate sparse
tensor to carry Python-side batch counts.

Non-goals
---------

The IR does not currently attempt to:

* import arbitrary PyTorch graphs;
* expose backend route selection;
* generate Python as the canonical runtime;
* infer arbitrary Python control flow without an explicit export hook;
* promise bitwise equality across CUDA and Metal.

The intended direction is a strict artifact boundary: future training runtimes
emit this sparse model IR, and ``mlx-lattice`` consumes it as a deployment
runtime.
